Do tiny humans run the same as normal humans?  Not really. Why? In short, the
problem is that big things aren’t the same as small things. Oh, sure everyone
knows that a big hamburger is different than a small hamburger, right?
Yes, but it’s worse than that. If you shrink down a human to a tiny size,
running doesn’t look like a full size human. Let’s see why.

Falling Ball Example
Let’s take a ball that is dropped from a 1 meter tall stick. I know that sounds
like it has nothing to do with running, but just hang on.
After the ball is dropped, there is only the gravitational force on the ball
and it will have a vertical acceleration of -g (where g = 9.8 m/s2).
Since it has a constant acceleration, I can write the following kinematic
equation and solve for the time it takes to hit the ground
(the initial velocity is zero).
With a height of 1 meter, it would take the ball 0.45 seconds to fall and hit
the ground. Ok, now let’s make a small version of this ball and stick.
Let’s make everything half the size.
Dropping from just 0.5 meters, the ball would only take 0.32 seconds to hit the
ground — which is NOT the same as 0.45 seconds. What does this have to do with
running? Just wait.

Let’s look at a slightly different example — a bouncing ball.
Instead of an actual running person, let’s consider a ball that is both bouncing
and moving horizontally. I can model this without too much difficulty by using
basic ideas of projectile motion and just reverse the vertical velocity of the
ball when it “hits” the ground. Here’s what that looks like for a ball with a
0.5 meter radius (assume a spherical human) and a horizontal velocity
of 2 m/s (4.5 mph).

Ok, now let’s do the same thing for a small Ant-Man. Of course, he is going to
be smaller in his small form. This also means that each step will cover less
distance. Suppose I shrink him by a scale factor of a. In order to make his run
look like normal sized human, I would also have to decrease his velocity by the
same factor a. So, for a Ant-Man a tenth the size, a = 0.1 and his horizontal
velocity would be 0.2 m/s. Oh, I would also make the spherical human smaller and
the surface he is running on smaller by the same factor.
If everything is smaller, shouldn’t it look the same?
No. There is one thing that isn’t smaller — the gravitational field.
This means that if tiny Ant-Man jumps with a lower speed, he won’t go as high
and he won’t be off the ground for as long of a time. He is still taking hops,
but the hops are super tiny — and yes, this is a tiny man on a tiny surface.
Everything is scaled down.

So, a tiny Ant-Man wouldn’t run like a full sized human.
It would look really weird. Maybe this is why humans and big animals
(like horses) run and leave the ground when they move fast. Insects just use
multiple legs to move fast but don’t get off the ground. That’s just a guess.

Oh, there is one way to make Ant-Man run in a normal looking fashion — decrease
the gravitational field (g) by the same scale factor.


Conclusion and Homework
The moral of this story is that small things are not the same as big things.
Ant-Man would run weird, but the movie seems to show him running with a lower
vertical acceleration to make it look more like a full sized human.
Overall, I think the Ant-Man movie (at least in this clip) found a good balance
between small and looking like a normal human (it’s a tough thing to do).

Now for some homework questions. What? You thought this was just for fun and
there would be no homework? Wrong. It’s homework time.

Yes, I know in my previous Ant-Man post I said that maybe Ant-Man doesn’t
actually shrink at all. Maybe he just stretches into extra dimensions. Ok, that
was just my way of explaining shrinking without changing mass.
So, here is your question: how can you use stretching into other dimensions
to explain how Ant-Man seems to run like a full sized human.
This can be an essay question.

Suppose Ant-Man is 11 mm tall but has the strength of a full size human.
If his density remains constant when he shrinks, what is his mass?

Using Ant-Man’s mass from above and the strength of a normal human,
how high could he jump? Assume the same force in his legs as he jumps but he
jumps over a shorter distance (because he is shorter).

From my video analysis data, I determined that Ant-Man went from 0.19 m/s to
2.1 m/s. If this velocity change takes just 0.167 seconds, what is the average
force exerted on Ant-Man (use the Momentum Principle).

Estimate the average force exerted on the guard during the punch.
Use this average force to calculate the average pressure Ant-Man exerts on the
guard’s face. Would this be enough to poke through his skin?

What if Ant-Man’s mass stays constant when he shrinks? What would be the
pressure exerted from his feet by standing on something? Would he “sink”?